CLDR-15370 Update Info Hub to announce Shakedown for CLDR 49 (#5625)
unicode-org/cldr: docs/site/translation.md

# Information Hub for Linguists

## News
- 2026-04-24 [CLDR Survey Tool][] opens for Shakedown

### Status and Schedule

The [CLDR Survey Tool][] is now open for [Shakedown][] for version 49.

> [DDL locales] remain open for submission through the Shakedown period. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[DDL locales] remain open for submission throughout the Shakedown period. 
```

The other key milestones are as follows:

> - [General Submission][] will start on April 29

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [General Submission][] will start on April 29.
```

- [Vetting][] will start on June 10.
- [Resolution][] will start on June 29.

For information about these phases, see [Survey Tool stages][].

We are reviewing new DDL locale requests for inclusion in CLDR 49.
See [how to add a new locales](https://cldr.unicode.org/development/adding-locales) for more information.

## Working in the Survey Tool

> Before you start Submission, please review the [Critical reminders (for all linguists][], and if you're new read the [CLDR training](#cldr-training-for-new-linguists).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before you start Submission, please review the [Critical reminders (for all linguists][], and if you're new to CLDR, read the [CLDR training](#cldr-training-for-new-linguists).
```

For the Submission phase, please prioritize the sections Missing, Provisional, and Errors. A summary of new items can be found in the [New Areas][] section below.

> Be sure to submit data for any items that you disagree with the current winning value during the [Submission][] phase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Be sure to submit data for any item where you disagree with the currently winning value during the [Submission][] phase.
```

> You will not be able to submit new data once the CLDR Survey Tool is in [Vetting][] mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will not be able to submit new data once the CLDR Survey Tool is in [Vetting][] mode, but you will be able to change your vote to another, previously submitted value.
```

4. Once you are ready, go to the [Survey Tool](https://st.unicode.org/cldr-apps/) and log in.

## New Areas

**_Please review all of these areas before you start! Details and guidelines are supplied below_**

| Area | New items | Number of items (approximate) |
| ---- | ----------------------- |:---------------:|
| Alphabetic Information | Preventing digit-digit concatenations | 1 |
| Locale display names | Nested Bracket Replacement | 4 |
| Locale display names | Territories | 3 |
| Locale display names | Additional Locale Display Names—Keys | ~90 | 
| Dates and times | Ordinal days in dates | ~30 per calendar + No. of ordinal categories |
| Dates and times | Numeric datetime separators | 2 |
| Dates and times | Additional available skeletons | ~7 |
| Dates and times | Append items | 5 |
| Timezones | Dual Standard/Daylight UTC offset format | 1 |
| Timezones | UTC timezone display patterns | 2 |
| Timezones | Samoa timezone name update | 1 |
| Characters | Unicode 18 emoji annotations | 18 |

### Alphabetic Information

#### Preventing digit-digit concatenations

> **in progress - This item might not be available at the start of Shakedown**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**In progress - This item might not be available at the start of Shakedown**
```

> There are some circumstances in which placeholders are sometimes replaced by numbers may concatenate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are some circumstances in which placeholders are replaced by numbers that may concatenate.
```

> This issue can occur in dates and times especially in languages that don't need spaces between words.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This issue can occur in dates and times, especially in languages that don't use spaces between words.
```

If more than one is commonly used in your locale, 
please use the separator that matches the current date and time formats in the CLDR.

#### Append Items

**TBD These items might not be available at the start of Shakedown**

There are 5 "Append Items" that contain patterns for adding fields to date patterns.
The {0} placeholder has the base (a date or time pattern) to add the field to, while the {1} pattern is the field to be added.

| Code | Base | Example |
| :---- | :---- | :---- |
| Era | date | June 1 2026 *AD* |
| Day-Of-Week | date | *Tuesday*, June 1 2026 |
| Time-Day-Of-Week | time | *Tuesday*, 13:00 |
| Timezone | time | 13:00 *UTC+3* |
| Date-Timezone | date | June 1 2026 *UTC+3* |

The pattern is used to determine which side of the base to add to, and which characters are added between the field and the base.

> The result is then treated as either a 

Reviewer: Unfinished sentence.

Reviewer 2: I removed it for now.

##### Guidelines
Look at the existing date and time patterns in Flexible formats that have eras, day-of-weeks, or timezones.
Use that to determine what the best pattern would be for arbitrary bases of the given type.
For example, where would an era appear relative to a `yMMM` or `yMMMMEEEd` pattern?

> Be sure to make sure that you put the {0} and {1} placeholders in the right order, and put the right separators between them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Make sure that you put the {0} and {1} placeholders in the right order, and put the right separators between them.
```

> (Locales that don't need spaces between words might have no separators: that is, a pattern like `{0}{1}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(Locales that don't need spaces between words might have no separators, such as `{0}{1}`.)
```

— so it can also be used to decode the meaning of the abbreviations used in the chits.

NOTE: For alphabetic information (such as exemplar characters), an older mechanism is still in place.

> This might be fixed at some point during submission.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We hope to update it during the submission phase.
```
